📄 文档信息: 共 12 页
文件: Expansion-Squeeze-Excitation_Fusion_Network_for_Elderly_Activity_Recognition.pdf

--- 第 1 页 ---
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 32, NO. 8, AUGUST 2022
5281
Expansion-Squeeze-Excitation Fusion Network for
Elderly Activity Recognition
Xiangbo Shu
, Jiawen Yang, Rui Yan
, and Yan Song
Abstract—This work focuses on the task of elderly activity
recognition, which is a challenging task due to the existence
of individual actions and human-object interactions in elderly
activities. Thus, we attempt to effectively aggregate the dis-
criminative information of actions and interactions from both
RGB videos and skeleton sequences by attentively fusing multi-
modal features. Recently, some nonlinear multi-modal fusion
approaches are proposed by utilizing nonlinear attention mech-
anism that is extended from Squeeze-and-Excitation Networks
(SENet). Inspired by this, we propose a novel Expansion-Squeeze-
Excitation Fusion Network (ESE-FN) to effectively address the
problem of elderly activity recognition, which learns modal and
channel-wise Expansion-Squeeze-Excitation (ESE) attentions for
attentively fusing the multi-modal features in the modal and
channel-wise ways. Speciﬁcally, ESE-FN ﬁrstly implements the
modal-wise fusion with the Modal-wise ESE Attention (M-ESEA)
to aggregate discriminative information in modal-wise way, and
then implements the channel-wise fusion with the Channel-
wise ESE Attention (C-ESEA) to aggregate the multi-channel
discriminative information in channel-wise way (referring to
Figure 1). Furthermore, we design a new Multi-modal Loss (ML)
to keep the consistency between the single-modal features and the
fused multi-modal features by adding the penalty of difference
between the minimum prediction losses on single modalities and
the prediction loss on the fused modality. Finally, we conduct
experiments on a largest-scale elderly activity dataset, i.e., ETRI-
Activity3D (including 110,000+ videos, and 50+ categories),
to demonstrate that the proposed ESE-FN achieves the best
accuracy compared with the state-of-the-art methods. In addition,
more extensive experimental results show that the proposed ESE-
FN is also comparable to the other methods in terms of normal
action recognition task.
Index Terms—Elderly activity recognition, activity recognition,
fusion network, multi-modal fusion.
I. INTRODUCTION
W
ITH the increasing population of the society, the aging
of the population is becoming more and more serious.
Manuscript received 16 November 2021; revised 30 December 2021;
accepted 9 January 2022. Date of publication 13 January 2022; date of current
version 4 August 2022. This work was supported in part by the National Key
Research and Development Program of China under Grant 2018AAA0102001,
in part by the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province under Grant
BK20211520, and in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China
under Grant 62072245 and Grant 61932020. This article was recommended
by Associate Editor C. Gan. (Corresponding author: Yan Song.)
The authors are with the School of Computer Science and Engineering,
Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing 210094, China
(e-mail:
shuxb@njust.edu.cn;
owen@njust.edu.cn;
ruiyan@njust.edu.cn;
songyan@njust.edu.cn).
Color versions of one or more ﬁgures in this article are available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TCSVT.2022.3142771.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TCSVT.2022.3142771
Coupled with the absence of young people from home all
year round, the proportion of empty-nesters in many countries
is increasing sharply. Since the physical quality and move-
ment ability of the elderly begin to decline, some kinds of
dangers are inclined to occur in life. In such circumstances,
some institutions are trying to provide intelligent monitoring
for the daily activities of the elderly by employing some
advanced technologies in the ﬁelds of artiﬁcial intelligence
and computer vision in recent years. As the key to intelligent
monitoring, elderly activity recognition is attracting increased
attentions.
By reviewing the normal action recognition methods,
we can divide these methods into two categories based on
the types of input data, i.e., RGB-based action recogni-
tion approach [1]–[8], and skeleton-based action recognition
approach [10]–[14]. For these two types of action recogni-
tion methods, various deep neural networks, as the currently
main models, have shown remarkable ability to model human
actions, such as Convolution Neural Network (CNN) [15],
Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) [16], Convolutional 3D
(C3D) [17], Long short-term memory (LSTM) [18], Graph
Convolutional Networks (GCN) [19], and so on. Gener-
ally, the RGB-based action recognition approach mainly gets
motion information of actions from RGB videos, which is
disturbed by the background information to some extent.
The skeleton-based action recognition approach faces a chal-
lenge for recognizing the actions with similar postures.
Thus, a natural way is to jointly model motion informa-
tion from both RGB videos and skeleton sequences [20],
[21]. One impressive solution of these methods is to build
two-branch deep neural networks, that ﬁrstly learn multi-
modal features from RGB and skeleton modalities, and then
fuse them.
Compared with normal action recognition, elderly activity
recognition is a more challenging task due to the existence
of individual actions and human-object interactions in elderly
activities, where many human-object interactions are local; the
amplitudes of many elderly activities are unapparent; and the
movements of some elderly activities are particularly similar.
For example, Figure 2 shows two groups of the typical elderly
activities, i.e., “Blowing hair” vs “Combing hair,” and “Mak-
ing call” vs “playing mobile.” For the comparison between
“Blowing hair” and “Combing hair,” the motion trajectory and
amplitude are very similar in spatiotemporal space, except
for the subtle clues of different objects in hand, i.e., comb
and blower. For the comparison between “Making call” and
“Playing mobile,” most motions and the interacting object
1051-8215 © 2022 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: NANJING UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on January 31,2023 at 14:11:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

--- 第 2 页 ---
5282
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 32, NO. 8, AUGUST 2022
Fig. 1.
Idea of our method for fusing multi-modal features in this work.
Our method fuses multi-modal features with the modal and channel-wise
Expansion-Squeeze-Excitation (ESE) attentions in the modal and channel-
wise ways.
(e.g., mobile) are the same as each other, except for local
hand movement in some frames. Therefore, how to capture
and fuse the discriminative information in RGB and skeleton
modalities is crucial for modeling elderly activities.
Multi-modal data or features fusion across different modal-
ities has always been a hot topic for years [22]–[31]. Since
multi-modal features often contain irrelevant (modal-speciﬁc)
information, the straightforward feature-level or score-level
fusion will degrade the discriminative ability of the fused
features. The key to successful fusion is how to reinforce
the discriminative information while suppressing the irrelevant
information among multi-modal features. To this end, some
works [32]–[34] propose to utilize the linear attention to
selectively fuse multi-modal features. Witnessing the impres-
sive classiﬁcation performance of Squeeze-and-Excitation Net-
works (SENet) [35] on ImageNet, some researchers [36]–[39]
extend linear fusion to the nonlinear fusion via Squeeze-and-
Excitation (SE).
In this work, we consider designing a couple of Squeeze-
and-Excitation based networks as nonlinear attention mecha-
nisms for effectively aggregating the motion information in
video and skeleton modalities by additionally bringing in
expansion, called Expansion-Squeeze-Excitation (ESE). Based
on this, we propose a novel Expansion-Squeeze-Excitation
Fusion Network (ESE-FN) to fuse multi-modal features with
modal and channel-wise ESE attentions. The overview frame-
work of ESE-FN is shown in Figure 3, which mainly con-
sists of four parts, i.e., feature extractor module, modal-
fusion module, channel-fusion module, and multi-modal loss.
First, ESE-FN randomly samples RGB frames in different
video clips, which are fed into the backbone to extract the
RGB features. Likewise, the skeleton features can be also
extracted from sampled skeleton sequences. Second, the con-
catenated RGB and skeleton features are fed into the modal-
fusion module for attentively fusing features in modal-wise
way, where M-Net aims to learn the Modal-wise Expansion-
Squeeze-Excitation Attention (M-ESEA) via modal-wise ESE,
as shown in Figure 1. Third, the output from the modal-
fusion module is further fed into the channel-fusion module for
attentively fusing features in channel-wise way, where C-Net
aims to learn the Channel-wise Expansion-Squeeze-Excitation
Attention (C-ESEA) via channel-wise ESE. Finally, we utilize
three types of features, i.e., RGB features, skeleton features,
fused multi-modal features, to construct three sub-losses,
which are integrated into a new Multi-modal Loss (ML). Here,
ML additionally brings in the penalty of difference between
the minimum prediction losses on single modalities and the
prediction loss on the fused modality, which can keep the
consistency between the single-modal features and the fused
multi-modal features.
Overall, the main contributions of this work can be summa-
rized as follows.
• We deeply explore the characteristics of elderly activi-
ties, and propose a novel Expansion-Squeeze-Excitation
Fusion Network (ESE-FN) to attentively fuse multi-
modal features in the modal and channel-wise ways for
effectively addressing the problem of elderly activity
recognition.
• To well capture the discriminative information of multi-
modal features, we design a ﬂexible Modal-fusion Net
(M-Net) and Channel-fusion Net (C-Net) to learn Modal-
wise Expansion-Squeeze-Excitation Attention (M-ESEA)
and Channel-wise Expansion-Squeeze-Excitation Atten-
tion (C-ESEA) for capturing the modal and channel-wise
dependencies among features, respectively.
• To keep the consistency between the single-modal fea-
tures and the fused multi-modal features, we design
a new Multi-modal Loss ML) to additionally measure
the difference between the minimum prediction loss on
single modalities and the prediction loss on the fused
modality.
• By conducting extensive experiments on both elderly
activity recognition and normal action recognition tasks,
we illustrate that the proposed ESE-FN method achieves
the SOTA performance compared with the other compet-
itive methods.
The rest of this paper is organized in the following.
Section II surveys some works related to RGB-based action
recognition, skeleton-based action recognition, and multi-
modal fusion. Section III introduces the proposed method
for elderly activity recognition in details. Section IV presents
results and analysis of experiments, followed by the conclu-
sions in Section V.
II. RELATED WORK
We survey some works related to RGB-based action recog-
nition, skeleton-based action recognition, and multi-modal
fusion.
A. RGB-Based Action Recognition
Most existing RGB-based Action Recognition methods can
be categorized into two classes. The ﬁrst class is based on
a two-stream network that usually uses RGB and optical
ﬂow to model spatial and temporal information, respectively.
Simonyan and Zisserman [40] proposed a two-stream network
to model spatial and temporal information in RGB and optical
ﬂow frames for the ﬁrst time. Subsequently, Wang et al. [41]
proposed a Temporal Segment Network (TSN) to model long-
range temporal action. Crasto et al. [43] proposed a distil-
lation network that uses optical ﬂow to distill RGB data,
which can make the RGB-based model learn the temporal
information. It is well known that optical ﬂow is computed by
Authorized licensed use limited to: NANJING UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on January 31,2023 at 14:11:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

--- 第 3 页 ---
SHU et al.: EXPANSION-SQUEEZE-EXCITATION FUSION NETWORK FOR ELDERLY ACTIVITY RECOGNITION
5283
Fig. 2.
Examples of elderly activities. The elderly activities, “Blowing hair” vs “Combing hair,” as well as “Making call” vs “Playing mobile” shows most
of similar motions in spatiotemporal space, where only the interacting objects (e.g., comb and blower are marked by yellow circle) are different or only few
local movements (right-hand movements are marked by red circle) are distinguishable.
using the RGB frames, which is time-consuming and would
bring in a bottleneck. The second class is based on a series
of 3D convolutional networks, such as, I3D [7], C3D [17],
T3D [44], Res3D [45], and so on, which are extended from
2D networks in spatiotemporal dimension. Due to the com-
putation consumption of general 3D convolutional networks,
Qiu et al. [46] proposed a Pseudo-3D residual network (P3D)
that decomposes the convolutions into separate 2D spatial
and 1D temporal ﬁlters. Moreover, Feichtenhofer et al. [3]
proposed to use two different frame rates to accelerate train
3D networks.
The above-mentioned methods are proposed to address the
problem of normal action recognition. Compared with the
normal action recognition task, the elderly activity recognition
task requires more discriminative information to identify some
subtle individual actions and human-object interactions in
elderly activities. Due to the lack of temporal information on
RGB data, the network implementing on RGB data cannot
accurately describe the actions with obvious temporal infor-
mation. Although some temporal information can be captured
from optical ﬂow data, the calculation of optical ﬂow is too
time-consuming.
B. Skeleton-Based Action Recognition
So far, there are many action recognition works based on
skeleton [10], [11], [11], [12], [14], [47], called skeleton-based
action recognition methods. The main target of skeleton-based
action recognition is to learn temporal and spatial information
from skeleton sequences. In the early stages, researchers
utilized various deep neural networks. e.g., Recurrent Neural
Network (RNN), Convolution Neural Network (CNN), and
Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM), to model skeleton motions
for capturing temporal and spatial information. For exam-
ple, Zhang et al. [10] proposed an adaptive model designed
by CNN and RNN to solve the problem of view differ-
ence during the skeleton data collection and action shooting.
Authorized licensed use limited to: NANJING UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on January 31,2023 at 14:11:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

--- 第 4 页 ---
5284
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 32, NO. 8, AUGUST 2022
Fig. 3.
The framework of the proposed ESE-FN method mainly consists of feature extractor module, modal-fusion module, channel-fusion module, and
multi-modal loss. It ﬁrstly employs the backbone to extract the RGB and skeleton features, respectively. And then, the concatenated RGB and skeleton
features are fed into the modal-fusion module and channel-fusion module for the modal and channel-wise fusions in turn. Speciﬁcally, M-Net and C-Net aim
to fuse features with the modal and channel-wise expansion-squeeze-excitation attentions for capturing modal and channel-wise dependencies among features,
respectively. Finally, a new multi-modal loss containing three sub-losses is designed to optimize the whole network by measuring the consistency between
the prediction loss on fused modalities and the prediction loss on single modalities.
Banerjee et al. [11] used CNN to extract different comple-
mentary motion information from skeleton sequences, e.g.,
distance and angle between joint points, to better model the
temporal information of skeleton data. Recently, researchers
used Graph Convolution Network (GCN) to model temporal
and spatial information from skeleton sequences by treating
skeletons, joints, and bonds as graphs, nodes, and edges,
respectively [12], [13], [48]. For example, Yan et al. [12]
proposed a Spatial-Temporal Graph Convolutional Network
(ST-GAN) that employs graph convolution to aggregate the
joint features in the spatial dimension. Liu et al. [48] pro-
posed a multi-stream graph convolutional network to avoid
the missing of structural information in the training phase.
Cheng et al. [13] proposed a Shift Graph Convolutional Net-
work (Shift-GCN) for solving the problem of inﬂexible accep-
tance domain of graph convolution network on both spatial and
temporal dimensions.
It can be found that skeleton-based action recognition meth-
ods mainly design an effective model to capture temporal and
spatial information from skeleton sequences, which is difﬁcult
to recognize human-object actions, e.g., blowing hair, combing
hair, etc.
C. Multi-Modal Fusion
Many works [20], [21], [24], [25], [27], [30], [31], [50]–[52]
consider aggregating information from multi-modal data for
various image and video content analysis tasks, such as video
action recognition, video anomaly detection and localization,
and so on. For example, Wang et al. [24] and Tang et al. [25]
proposed the score-level and feature-level multi-modal fusions,
respectively. Those straightforward fusion methods did not
consider the interaction among different multi-modal infor-
mation. Zhang et al. [31] proposed to employ several con-
volutions to fuse the RGB and depth features, which only
considered the interaction among multi-modal information
from the local view. Zhou et al. [30] proposed to fuse the
RGB and thermal image features by channel and spatial-wise
attentions, respectively. Overall, on the one hand, different
modality data have different distributions. On the other hand,
multi-modal data often contain irrelevant (modal-speciﬁc)
information. Thus, how to aggregate information from multi-
modal features is the main problem. Multi-modal data or
features fusion across different modalities is always a hot
topic, some classical methods [32]–[34] were proposed to
utilize the linear embedding or attention mechanism to fuse
multi-modal features. For example, Hori et al. [33] propose a
multi-modal attention model that selectively fuses multi-modal
features based on learned attention. With the advancement
of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN), some nonlinear
fusion approaches of multi-modal features are proposed by
designing various convolutional networks as the attention
mechanism [36]–[39], [53]. For example, Kuang et al. [37]
proposed a multi-modal fusion network based on CNN for
face anti-spooﬁng detection. Fooladgar and Kasaei [38] used
an efﬁcient attention method based on CNN architecture
to fuse RGB data and depth maps in channel-wise way.
Su et al. [54] used the soft attention method to interact multi-
modal data in channel-wise way. To fully fuse the multi-modal
features, we consider interacting information of multi-modal
features not only in channel-wise way but also in modal-
wise way. In this work, we design a ﬂexible Expansion-
Squeeze-Excitation (ESE) in Modal-fusion Net (M-Net) and
Channel-fusion Net (C-Net) to learn modal and channel-wise
nonlinear attention for capturing the modal and channel-wise
dependencies among features, respectively.
III. METHODOLOGY
In this section, we mainly introduce Expansion-Squeeze-
Excitation Fusion Network (ESE-FN). Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst
revisit the SENet as a warm-up, and then introduce the
framework of ESE-FN in details, including Modal-fusion
Net (M-Net), Channel-fusion Net (C-Net), and Multi-modal
Loss (ML).
Authorized licensed use limited to: NANJING UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on January 31,2023 at 14:11:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

--- 第 5 页 ---
SHU et al.: EXPANSION-SQUEEZE-EXCITATION FUSION NETWORK FOR ELDERLY ACTIVITY RECOGNITION
5285
A. Revisiting SENet
Squeeze-and-Excitation Networks (SENet) [35] has shown
remarkable performance in the ImageNet database by explic-
itly capturing the channel-wise dependencies between feature
maps. Here, the channel-wise dependencies are quantiﬁed
via the nonlinear attention corresponding to each channel.
The nonlinear attention is obtained by Squeeze-and-Excitation
(SE). SENet has been proven that learning channel-wise
nonlinear attention can improve the discriminative ability of
features.
In SENet, Squeeze-and-Excitation (SE) can be divided into
two steps: squeeze and excitation in turn, which are used
for obtaining channel-wise representation and channel-wise
nonlinear attention. Speciﬁcally, assuming C feature maps,
denoted by X = {Xc}C
c=1, for one feature map Xc in the c-th
channel, the squeeze operation is performed as follows,
Yc =
1
H × W
H

i=1
W

j=1
Xc(i, j),
(1)
where H and W denote the height and width of the feature
map, respectively, Yc is the result of global average pool-
ing for the c-th channel. In the squeeze step, all feature
maps are transformed to a channel-wise representation Y =
[Y1, Y2, · · · , Yc, · · · , YC]T , which is a one-dimensional vector.
In the excitation step, the channel-wise representation Y is fed
into multi fully-connected layers to obtain the channel-wise
attention W, as follows,
W = σ(F1(Relu(F2(Y)))),
(2)
where F∗denotes a Fully Connected (FC) layer in this work,
and σ is a sigmoid function. Finally, the original feature maps
X can be updated to ˆX by the following equation
ˆX = X ⊗W,
(3)
where
⊗
denotes
channel-wise
multiplication
between
X and W. Compared with the original feature maps X,
the updated feature map ˆX has enhanced the discriminative
information, while suppressing the useless or irrelevant modal-
speciﬁc information to some extent.
Through the above analysis, we can ﬁnd that SENet uses the
global average pooling to interact spatial information. Since
the global average pooling is implemented from the global
view, the learned nonlinear attention is signiﬁcantly affected by
noise (e.g., a large area of background). In this work, to well
capture the local and global spatial information of features,
we consider interacting spatial information from the local and
global views.
B. Overview of ESE-FN
For the task of elderly activity recognition, we attempt
to aggregate the discriminative information from both RGB
videos and skeleton sequences by attentively fusing multi-
modal features. Thus, multi-modal features fusion across
multiple modalities is key to modeling the motion among
RGB videos and skeleton sequences. Based on Squeeze-
and-Excitation in SENet, we design a new Modal-fusion
Net (M-Net) and a new Channel-fusion Net (C-Net) to
learn the Modal-wise Expansion-Squeeze-Excitation Attention
(M-ESEA) and Channel-wise Expansion-Squeeze-Excitation
Attention (C-ESEA) for capturing the modal and channel-wise
dependencies among features, respectively. By integrating M-
Net and C-Net as the main components, a novel Expansion-
Squeeze-Excitation Fusion Network (ESE-FN) is proposed to
attentively fuse the multi-modal features with M-ESEA and
C-ESEA. The framework of ESE-FN is shown in Figure 3,
which mainly consists of four parts, i.e., feature extractor
module, modal-fusion module, channel-fusion module, and
multi-modal loss.
Denoted {vi|i = 1, 2, 3, . . . N} as an video set with size
N, we ﬁrst split each video into T clips and random sam-
ple a frame from each clip. Then, we get the frame set
{ri|i = 1, 2, 3, . . . T } as one input video r, which are fed into
the RGB backbone (e.g., ResNeXt101 [55]) to extract the RGB
feature fr ∈Rd1×1 ( d∗denotes the feature dimension in this
paper), as follows,
fr = FRGB(r).
(4)
Likewise, for video r, the corresponding skeleton sequence
s is obtained and fed into the skeleton backbone (e.g., Shif-
GCN [13]) to extract the skeleton feature fs ∈Rd2×1,
fs = FSkeleton(s).
(5)
Generally, the multi-modal features, i.e., fr and fs, have
different sizes and cannot be directly concatenated. Thus,
we use two MLPS to unify the size of fr and fs, and then
concatenate them, as follows,
f = FConcat(Hr( fr), Hs( fs)),
(6)
where f ∈Rd×n, n is the number of modality, Hr and Hs are
MLP, and Concat(·) is a modal-wise concatenation operator.
Subsequently, we transpose the feature f and feed it into
M-Net for modal-wise fusion, as follows,
hm = FM-Net(FTrans( f )),
(7)
where FTrans(·) is a transpose operator. Likewise, hm is trans-
posed and fed into C-Net for channel-wise fusion, as follows,
hmc = FC-Net(FTrans(hm)),
(8)
We sum up feature hmc in modal-wise way and get the fused
multi-modal feature frs.
Finally, RGB feature fr, skeleton feature fs and fused multi-
modal feature frs are fed into a new Multi-modal Loss (ML)
for optimizing all parameters of ESE-FN, as follows,
 = argmin(L(Fr( fr), Frs( frs), Fs( fs))),
(9)
where  denotes the parameter set of the proposed ESE-FN.
The following sections introduce M-Net, C-Net, Multi-modal
Loss in details.
C. Modal-Fusion Net (M-Net)
The detailed conﬁguration of Modal-fusion Net (M-Net)
is shown in Figure 4. M-Net can attentively aggregate the
local and global spatial discriminative information of multi-
modal features via M-ESEA in modal-wise way. Speciﬁ-
cally, we ﬁrstly extend the transposed feature f ∈Rn×d to
Authorized licensed use limited to: NANJING UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on January 31,2023 at 14:11:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

--- 第 6 页 ---
5286
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 32, NO. 8, AUGUST 2022
Fig. 4.
Conﬁguration of Modal-fusion Net (M-Net) in details. The multi-modal features are fused with Modal-wise Expansion-Squeeze-Excitation Attention
(M-ESEA) in modal-wise way. M-ESEA is obtained by the modal-wise nonlinear attention mechanism mainly composed of the convolutional layers, average
pooling layer, and FC layer.
f ∈Rn×d×1 as the input of M-Net. Similar to Squeeze-
and-Excitation in SENet, we divide the implementation of
M-Net into three steps, i.e., modal-wise expansion, modal-
wise squeeze, and modal-wise excitation in turn, which are
detailed in the following.
1) Modal-Wise Expansion Step: It uses several stacked
convolutional layers with different kernels to interact modal-
wise information by expanding the modal information from the
local view. Then the expanded feature fml can be described
as follows,
fml = Conv1(Conv2(Conv3( f ))),
(10)
where
fml ∈Rm×dm×1, dm is the spatial dimension after
convolution transformation (m × dm > n × d).
Here,
fml
can
be
also
regarded
as
the
single-modal feature
set
{ f i
ml ∈R(m/n)×dm}n
i=1.
2) Modal-Wise Squeeze Step: It utilizes fml to calculate
the modal-wise representation fmlg ∈Rm×1 (m < n × d) from
global view via the average pooling, as follows,
fmlg =
1
dm × 1
dm

i=1
1

j=1
fml(i, j).
(11)
3) Modal-Wise Excitation Step:
It utilizes the modal-
wise representation fmlg to learn the Modal-wise Expansion-
Squeeze-Excitation Attention (M-ESEA) Wm for capturing the
modal-wise dependence of features. Finally, the original input
feature f can be updated to the modal-wise fused feature
hm ∈Rn×d×1 based on the following equations,
Wm = σ(F3(Relu(F4( fmlg))));
(12)
hm = f ⊗Wm.
(13)
Compared with SENet, it is noted that we additionally bring
in the expanding of features as the partner of the squeezing.
Expanding and squeezing provide the interactions of features
in up-size and down-size ways, which can capture both of local
and global dependencies of features. Different from SENet
dealing with the single-modal feature map, we deal with the
multi-modal features which can been seen as a feature map
by concatenating two modal feature vectors. In the modal-
wise expansion step, the convolutions with different kernels
can be used to capture the local spatial correlation of multi-
modal features in different regions, which can capture the
local dependencies of features. In the modal-wise squeeze step,
the global average pooling can be used to capture the global
spatial correlation of multi-modal features, which can capture
the global dependencies of features.
Fig. 5.
Conﬁguration of Channel-fusion Net (C-Net) in details. The multi-
modal features are fused with Channel-wise Expansion-Squeeze-Excitation
Attention (C-ESEA) in channel-wise way. C-ESEA is obtained by the channel-
wise nonlinear attention mechanism mainly composed of the convolutional
layer, average pooling layer, and FC layer.
D. Channel-Fusion Net (C-Net)
In this section, we focus on our Channel-fusion Net (C-Net),
as shown in ﬁgure 5. C-Net aims to learn C-ESEA for fusing
multi-modal features in channel-wise way. Similar to M-Net,
the implementation of C-Net can be also divided into the
channel-wise expansion, channel-wise squeeze, and channel-
wise excitation in turn, described in the following.
1) Channel-Wise Expansion Step: It uses the convolutional
layer to interact channel-wise information by expanding the
channel information from the local view. Then the expanded
features hcg can be calculated as follows,
hcg = Conv4(hm),
(14)
where hcg ∈Rd×n1×1, n1 > n. It is noted that the multi-
modal features are processed by M-Net and C-Net in turn.
First, in M-Net, the difference of cross-modal features is
relatively large, thus the expansion is large by setting multi-
layers. Subsequently, in C-Net (after processed by M-Net), the
difference of cross-modal features is relatively small, which
only requires a relatively smaller expansion. Thus we set only
one convolution layer in C-Net for lightweight designing.
2) Channel-Wise Squeeze Step: It utilizes hcg to calculate
the channel-wise representation fcg from the global view via
the average pooling, as follows,
fcg =
1
n1 × 1
n1

i=1
1

j=1
hcg(i, j),
(15)
where, fcg ∈Rd×1 can be also regarded as the single-channel
feature set { f i
cg ∈R1×1}d
i=1.
3) Channel-Wise Excitation Step: It utilizes the channel-
wise representation fcg to learn the Channel-wise Expansion-
Squeeze-Excitation Attention (C-ESEA) Wc for capturing the
Authorized licensed use limited to: NANJING UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on January 31,2023 at 14:11:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

--- 第 7 页 ---
SHU et al.: EXPANSION-SQUEEZE-EXCITATION FUSION NETWORK FOR ELDERLY ACTIVITY RECOGNITION
5287
channel-wise dependence of features, as follows,
Wc = σ(F5(Relu(F6( fcg)))).
(16)
Finally, we get the feature updated in channel-wise way,
described as follows,
hmc = hm ⊗Wc.
(17)
By comparing with the formulations of M-Net and C-Net,
modal-wise fusion can be seen as a rough fusion of multi-
modal features in modal-wise way, while channel-wise fusion
can be seen as a ﬁne-grained fusion of multi-modal features
in channel-wise way. Both of them attentively aggregate the
discriminative information of multi-modal features based on
modal and channel-wise dependencies of features.
E. Multi-Modal Loss (ML)
To keep the consistency between the single-modal features
and the fused multi-modal features, we design a new Multi-
modal Loss (ML) to additionally measure the difference
between the prediction loss on single modalities and the
prediction loss on the fused modality. The key idea of multi-
modal loss is that we take the minimum prediction loss on
single modalities to be consistent with the prediction loss
on the fused modality. Formally, we deﬁne three types of
recognition losses Lr, Ls, and Lrs corresponding to the RGB
modality, skeleton modality, and fused modality, respectively.
Then the multi-modal loss can be described as follows,
L = α × Lrs + β × (min(Lr, Ls) −Lrs),
(18)
where α and β are hyper-parameters (will be discussed in
Section IV-C). In this work, the forms of Lr, Ls, and Lrs are
cross entropy loss.
IV. EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we conduct experiments to evaluate the
performance of the proposed ESE-FN in terms of the elderly
activity recognition task. Besides, we further conduct compar-
ative experiments between the proposed ESE-FN and the other
advanced methods in terms of the normal action recognition
task.
A. Datasets
We evaluate the performance of ESE-FN in terms of
the elderly activity recognition task on the ETRI-Activity3D
dataset [56]. It is the currently largest elderly activity recogni-
tion dataset collected in real-world surveillance environments,
which contains 112,620 samples performed by 100 persons
including RGB videos, depth maps, and skeleton sequences.
All videos are grouped into 55 classes of actions, including
individual activities, human-object interactions, and multiper-
son interactions. The splitting of training and testing sets
is based on person ID, namely the samples with person
ID {3, 6, 9, , · · · , 99} for testing, and the samples with person
ID {1, 2, 4, 5, · · · , 100} for training.
TABLE I
TEST ON THE REPRESENTATION POWER FOR DIFFERENT
BACKBONES ON THE ETRI-ACTIVITY3D DATASET
Fig. 6.
The training loss and accuracy of ESE-FN on the ETRI-Activity3D
dataset.
B. Implementation Details
In the data pre-processing phase, we split each video into
T
= 64 clips, and randomly select one frame for each
clip. Finally, we obtain a new video set, wherein each video
contains 64 frames. Likewise, we also obtain a new skeleton
set, wherein each skeleton sequence contains 64 frames.
In the feature extraction phase, we use ResNeXt18 or
ResNeXt101 [55] as the RGB backbone, and Shift-GCN [13]
as the skeleton backbone. For the pre-trained ResNeXt18 and
ResNeXt101, we ﬁne tune them with the standard SGD opti-
mizer by setting the momentum, initial learning rate, weight
decay, and total epochs as 0.9, 0.1, 10−3, and 120, respectively.
Especially, the batch size is set to 128 and 32 for ResNeXt18
and ResNeXt101, respectively. For the pre-trained Shift-GCN,
we ﬁne tune it with the standard SGD optimizer by setting the
momentum, initial learning rate, batch size, and total epochs
as 0.9, 0.1, 10−4, 32, and 140, respectively. Subsequently,
we use the ﬁne-tuned RGB and skeleton backbone to extract
RGB and skeleton features, respectively. Here, to test the
representation performance of ResNeXt18, ResNeXt101, and
Shift-GCN, we use these three models to extract single-modal
features for training a softmax independently. For example,
we use ResNeXt18 to extract RGB features and feed them
into the softmax. The obtained performance for three models
is listed in Table I. We can see that ResNeXt101 performs
better than ResNeXt18. In this paper, we choose ResNeXt101
as the RGB backbone in default.
In the training phase of ESE-FN, we use the standard SGD
optimizer to train it by setting the momentum, basic learning
rate, weight decay, batch size, and total epochs as 0.9, 0.1,
10−4, 32 and 30, respectively. All above experiments are
performed via the PyTorch deep learning framework on the
Linux server equipped with Titan RTX GPU. The training loss
and accuracy of ESE-FN as the number of epochs are shown
in Figure 6. We can see that the training loss and accuracy of
ESE-FN reach a steady state after about 30 epochs. And then,
Authorized licensed use limited to: NANJING UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on January 31,2023 at 14:11:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

--- 第 8 页 ---
5288
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 32, NO. 8, AUGUST 2022
Fig. 7.
The curves of performance are obtained by varying one hyper-
parameter with the other parameter ﬁxed to be the default value. The best
performance is achieved when α = 0.7, and β = 0.3.
the overall loss is consistent with the other sub-losses (i.e.,
RGB modality, skeleton modality, and fused modality losses)
in terms of convergence.
C. Diagnostic Study
We conduct the diagnostic study to discuss the sensitiveness
of the hyper-parameters α and β in Eq. (18). Here, to enhance
the efﬁciency of the diagnostic study, we use ResNeXt18
instead of ResNeXt101 as the RGB backbone and set T = 16
without loss of generality. Speciﬁcally, we empirically tune
them by α ∈{0.3, 0.5, 0.7, 0.9} and β ∈{0, 0.3, 0.6, 0.9},
respectively. The corresponding results are shown in Figure 7.
It can be found that the best performance of ESE-FN is
achieved when α = 0.7, and β = 0.3. Thus, we set α = 0.7,
and β = 0.3 in experiments. Moreover, when β = 0, the
multi-modal loss L is degraded to a basic action recognition
loss Lrs, where the performance is degraded signiﬁcantly. This
illustrates that the designed Multi-modal Loss is more effective
than the basic loss.
D. Ablation Study
As mentioned before, Modal-fusion Net (M-Net), Channel-
fusion Net (C-Net), and Multi-modal Loss (ML) are new
components in the framework of the proposed ESE-FN. Thus
we conduct ablation study to evaluate the superiority of M-Net,
C-Net, and ML. We ﬁrstly set seven baselines, as follows,
• B1: Single modal for RGB employs RGB backbone
to extract the RGB features, which are directly used
to train the softmax classiﬁer. This aims to test the
basic recognition performance by using the single-modal
features in RGB videos.
• B2: Single modal for skeleton employs skeleton back-
bone to extract the skeleton features, which are directly
used to train the softmax classiﬁer. This aims to test the
basic recognition performance by using the single-modal
features in skeleton sequences.
• B3: Multi modal for RGB and skeleton employs RGB
backbone and skeleton backbone to extract the RGB
features and skeleton features, which are concatenated
and fed into the softmax classiﬁer. This aims to test
the basic recognition performance by simply combining
multi-modal features.
TABLE II
ABLATION STUDY FOR ESE-FN WITH DIFFERENT COMPONENTS
TABLE III
ABLATION STUDY FOR COMPARING THE PERFORMANCE
OF SENET (WITHOUT EXPANSION) AND ESE-FN
• B4: ESE-FN w/o C-Net is a degraded version of ESE-FN
by dropping out the channel-fusion module. This aims to
show the superiority of M-Net.
• B5: ESE-FN w/o M-Net is a degraded version of
ESE-FN by dropping out the modal-fusion module. This
aims to show the superiority of C-Net.
• B6: ESE-FN w/o ML is a degraded version of ESE-FN
by using the basic loss Lrs instead of ML L, namely
setting α = 1, and β = 0. This aims to show the
superiority of ML.
• B7: the proposed ESE-FN.
The comparison results among all baselines are shown in
Table II. Compared with single-modal and multi-modal base-
lines, B3-B7 (using multi-modal features) outperform B1-B2
(using single-modal features), which validates that the multi-
modal features contain more complementary information than
the single-modal features. In particular, B4-B7 are equipped
with the newly designed components, and perform better than
B3 (simply combining multi-modal features). This validates
that each component, i.e., M-Net, C-Net, or ML, is supe-
rior to help improving the representation ability of multi-
modal feature fusion. Here, B6 integrated with M-Net and
C-Net further improves by 0.4%(1.2%) over B4(B5) only with
M-Net(C-Net). Obviously, ESE-FN (i.e., B7) integrated with
all new components achieves the best performance. It is further
validated that M-Net, C-Net, and ML can jointly improve the
representation ability of multi-modal feature fusion.
SENet is the most related work, where we have added
the Expansion step based on SENet and pushed it into the
multi-modal fusion task. Thus, we also conduct the ablation
experiment to compare with the proposed ESE-FN and SENet
by setting six baselines, as follows:
• A1: SENet only for channel-wise fusion uses SENet
instead of C-Net for multi-modal feature fusion only in
the channel-wise way. This can be seen as simply using
Squeeze-Excitation for channel-wise fusion.
• A2: SENet only for modal-wise fusion uses SENet
instead of M-Net for multi-modal feature fusion only in
Authorized licensed use limited to: NANJING UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on January 31,2023 at 14:11:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

--- 第 9 页 ---
SHU et al.: EXPANSION-SQUEEZE-EXCITATION FUSION NETWORK FOR ELDERLY ACTIVITY RECOGNITION
5289
TABLE IV
COMPARISON WITH CURRENT METHODS ON ETRI-ACTIVITY3D DATASET. EVOLUTION POSE MAP [57]
AND FSA-CNN [56] DO NOT ADOPT THE BACKBONE MODULE
the modal-wise way. This can be seen as simply using
Squeeze-Excitation for modal-wise fusion.
• A3: SENet for modal and channel-wise fusion uses
SENet instead of M-Net and C-Net for multi-modal
feature fusion in both the modal-wise and channel-
wise ways. This can be seen as simply using Squeeze-
Excitation for both modal-wise and channel-wise fusions.
• A4: ESE-FN only for channel-wise fusion only uses
C-Net for multi-modal feature fusion in channel-wise
way.
• A5: ESE-FN only for modal-wise fusion only uses
M-Net for multi-modal feature fusion in modal-wise way.
• A6: ESE-FN (Ours) uses M-Net and C-Net for multi-
modal feature fusion in both the modal-wise and channel-
wise ways.
The comparison result of the ablation study is listed in
Table III. We can ﬁnd that 1) ESE-FN improves by 0.6%
over A3 (SENet for modal and channel-wise fusion), which
illustrate that the Expansion step is effective; and 2) A3
outperforms both A1 and A2, as well as A6 outperforms both
A4 and A5, which illustrate that our modal and channel-wise
fusion strategy is effective and ﬂexible for the SENet family.
E. Results and Analysis
We evaluate the performance of the proposed ESE-FN on
the elderly activity recognition task by comparing it with
the currently representative multi-modal methods, including
Deep Bilinear Learning [58], Evolution Pose Map [57],
c-ConvNet [59], and FSA-CNN [56]. Speciﬁcally, Deep Bilin-
ear Learning uses RGB frames, depth maps, and skeleton
sequences; Evolution Pose Map uses 3D and 2D poses
extracted from RGB frames and HeatMaps, respectively;
c-ConvNet uses RGB frames and depth maps; FSA-CNN uses
2D and 3D skeletons extracted from RGB frames and depth
maps. The comparison results of all methods are shown in
Table IV, where some results have been reported in [56].
The proposed ESE-FN with the accuracy of 95.9% achieves
the state-of-the-art performance, which improves by 2.2% (a
relative 2.3% improvement) over the previous SOTA method,
namely FSA-CNN with the accuracy of 93.7%. For a fair
comparison, ESE-FN adopts the same backbone as the RGB
feature extractor, and also performs better than the Deep Bilin-
ear Learning method and c-ConvNet method, which illustrates
the robustness of ESE-FN.
In addition, the confusion matrices obtained by ESE-FN,
Shift-GCN and ResNeXt101 are shown in Figure 8. First,
the confusion matrix of ESE-FN shows that the color of the
main diagonal is lighter than other spaces, which illustrates
TABLE V
COMPARISON WITH CURRENT METHODS ON THE NUT RGB+D DATASET
all classes of elderly activities can be well recognized by
ESE-FN. Second, compared with the confusion matrices of
ESE-FN, Shift-GCN, and ResNeXt101, we can ﬁnd that the
color of the main diagonal in Figure 8(c) is lighter than
the color of the main diagonal in Figure 8(a) and (b). This
shows that ESE-FN is more effective for recognizing the
confusing elderly activities by capturing more discriminative
multi-modal information.
F. Extended Experiment on Normal Action Recognition
To test the generalization of the proposed ESE-FN, we also
conduct comparative experiments between the proposed ESE-
FN and the other advanced methods in terms of the normal
action recognition task. We use the NTU RGB+D dataset [71]
as the benchmark. The NTU RGB+D dataset is a large-
scale dataset collected by three Kinect cameras from different
views concurrently, and has been widely used for evaluating
RGB-based or skeleton-based action recognition methods.
It includes 56,880 skeleton sequences and 60 different classes
from 40 distinct subjects. NTU RGB+D dataset provides two
standard evaluation protocols, i.e., Cross-Subject (CS) setting,
and Cross-View (CV) setting. In the CS setting, the training
set includes 40,320 samples performed by 20 subjects, and
the testing set includes 16,560 samples performed by the other
20 subjects. In the CV setting, the training set includes 37,920
samples obtained from camera views 2 and 3, and the testing
set includes 18,960 samples obtained from camera view 1.
Table V shows the recognition accuracies obtained by dif-
ferent methods on the NTU RGB+D dataset, where the perfor-
mance of the other methods have been reported in [56]. We can
Authorized licensed use limited to: NANJING UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on January 31,2023 at 14:11:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

--- 第 10 页 ---
5290
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 32, NO. 8, AUGUST 2022
Fig. 8.
The confusion matrices obtained by Shift-GCN, ResNeXt101, and ESE-FN on the ETRI-Activity3D dataset. It should be noted that ETRI-Activity3D
dataset does not provides the names of all class.
Fig. 9.
The confusion matrices obtained by ESE-FN on the NTU RGB+D dataset.
see that ESE-FN is comparable to the alternatives, including
RNN-based methods (e.g., IndRNN [60], Beyond Joint [61]),
CNN-based methods (e.g., SK-CNN [62], MANs [65], Deep
Bilinear Learning [58]), and GCN-based methods (e.g., ST-
GCN [12], Shift-GCN [13]). Speciﬁcally, ESE-FN improves
by 0.7% and 0.2% over the SOTA methods, namely Evolution
Pose Map with the accuracy of 91.7% and Shift-GCN with
the accuracy of 96.5% on CS and CV settings, respectively.
In addition, we also show the confusion matrices obtained by
ESE-FN on NTU RGB+D (CS and CV) in Figure 9(a) and (b).
These confusion matrices show that the color of the main
diagonal is lighter than other spaces, which illustrates all
classes of normal actions can be well recognized by ESE-FN.
It can be concluded that the proposed ESE-FN is generalized
to recognize normal actions.
V. CONCLUSION
In this work, we propose a novel Expansion-Squeeze-
Excitation Fusion Network (ESE-FN) to well address the
problem of elderly activity recognition by learning modal and
channel-wise Expansion-Squeeze-Excitation (ESE) attentions
for attentively fusing the multi-modal features in the modal
and channel-wise ways, respectively. Overall, the framework
of ESE-FN consisting of the feature extractor module, modal-
fusion module, channel-wise module, and multi-modal loss
can be summarised as two main insights. First, Modal-fusion
Net (M-Net) and Channel-fusion Net (C-Net) can capture
the modal and channel-wise dependencies among features for
enhancing the discriminative ability of features via Modal
and channel-wise ESEs. Second, Multi-modal Loss (ML) can
enforce the consistency between the single-modal features and
the fused multi-modal features by additionally bringing in
the penalty of difference between the minimum prediction
losses on the single modalities and the prediction loss on the
fused modality. Experimental results on both elderly activity
recognition and normal action recognition tasks demonstrate
that the proposed ESE-FN achieves the SOTA performance
compared with the other competitive methods. To the best
of our knowledge, ESE-FN is the ﬁrst work that adopts the
combination of expanding and squeezing to fully interacting
features from the local and global views for learning nonlinear
attention.
Discussions: We refer to SENet’s idea that enhances the
feature quality of different channels via nonlinear attention.
SENet only uses a single global pooling operation to get a
representation of channel information, which can be seen as a
down-sampling interaction of features. In this work, we con-
sider both the up-sampling and down-sampling interaction of
features and present a new Expansion step, which can be
further used to expand the modal information and channel
information. The idea of up-sampling and down-sampling via
Expansion and Squeeze is the ﬁrst attempt in the SENet family,
which will be insightful for the other researchers. Moreover,
as one member of the SENet family, ESE-FN is not limited
Authorized licensed use limited to: NANJING UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on January 31,2023 at 14:11:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.

--- 第 11 页 ---
SHU et al.: EXPANSION-SQUEEZE-EXCITATION FUSION NETWORK FOR ELDERLY ACTIVITY RECOGNITION
5291
only to the task of conventional feature learning and has been
successfully extended for multi-modal feature fusion learning.
This can be seen as an exemplary case that shows SENet for
multi-modal feature fusion learning.
REFERENCES
[1] X. Shu, L. Zhang, Y. Sun, and J. Tang, “Host–parasite: Graph LSTM-in-
LSTM for group activity recognition,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn.
Syst., vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 663–674, Feb. 2021.
[2] C. Li, Q. Zhong, D. Xie, and S. Pu, “Collaborative spatiotemporal
feature learning for video action recognition,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2019, pp. 7872–7881.
[3] C. Feichtenhofer, H. Fan, J. Malik, and K. He, “SlowFast networks for
video recognition,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV),
Oct. 2019, pp. 6202–6211.
[4] X. Wang and A. Gupta, “Videos as space-time region graphs,” in Proc.
Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV), Sep. 2018, pp. 399–417.
[5] J. Tang, X. Shu, R. Yan, and L. Zhang, “Coherence constrained graph
LSTM for group activity recognition,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach.
Intell., vol. 44, no. 2, pp. 636–647, Feb. 2022.
[6] J. Lin, C. Gan, and S. Han, “TSM: Temporal shift module for efﬁcient
video understanding,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis.
(ICCV), Oct. 2019, pp. 7082–7092.
[7] J. Carreira and A. Zisserman, “Quo vadis, action recognition? A new
model and the kinetics dataset,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jul. 2017, pp. 6299–6308.
[8] X. Shu, J. Tang, G.-J. Qi, W. Liu, and J. Yang, “Hierarchical long
short-term concurrent memory for human interaction recognition,” IEEE
Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 43, no. 3, pp. 1110–1118,
Mar. 2021.
[9] X. Shu, J. Tang, G.-J. Qi, Y. Song, Z. Li, and L. Zhang, “Concurrence-
aware long short-term sub-memories for person-person action recogni-
tion,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. Workshops
(CVPRW), Jul. 2017, pp. 1–8.
[10] P. Zhang, C. Lan, J. Xing, W. Zeng, J. Xue, and N. Zheng, “View
adaptive neural networks for high performance skeleton-based human
action recognition,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 41,
no. 8, pp. 1963–1978, Aug. 2019.
[11] A. Banerjee, P. K. Singh, and R. Sarkar, “Fuzzy integral-based CNN
classiﬁer fusion for 3D skeleton action recognition,” IEEE Trans. Cir-
cuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 31, no. 6, pp. 2206–2216, Jun. 2021.
[12] S. Yan, Y. Xiong, and D. Lin, “Spatial temporal graph convolutional
networks for skeleton-based action recognition,” in Proc. AAAI Conf.
Artif. Intell. (AAAI), 2018, pp. 7444–7452.
[13] K. Cheng, Y. Zhang, X. He, W. Chen, J. Cheng, and H. Lu, “Skeleton-
based action recognition with shift graph convolutional network,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
Jun. 2020, pp. 183–192.
[14] X. Shu, L. Zhang, G.-J. Qi, W. Liu, and J. Tang, “Spatiotempo-
ral co-attention recurrent neural networks for human-skeleton motion
prediction,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., early access,
Jan. 12, 2021, doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2021.3050918.
[15] S. Albawi, T. A. Mohammed, and S. Al-Zawi, “Understanding of a
convolutional neural network,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Eng. Technol. (ICET),
Aug. 2017, pp. 1–6.
[16] W. Zaremba, I. Sutskever, and O. Vinyals, “Recurrent neural network
regularization,” 2014, arXiv:1409.2329.
[17] D. Tran, L. Bourdev, R. Fergus, L. Torresani, and M. Paluri, “Learning
spatiotemporal features with 3D convolutional networks,” in Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Dec. 2015, pp. 4489–4497.
[18] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory,” Neural
Comput., vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–1780, 1997.
[19] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, “Semi-supervised classiﬁcation with graph
convolutional networks,” 2016, arXiv:1609.02907.
[20] G. Liu, J. Qian, F. Wen, X. Zhu, R. Ying, and P. Liu, “Action recognition
based on 3D skeleton and RGB frame fusion,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int.
Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS), Nov. 2019, pp. 258–264.
[21] S. Das, M. Koperski, F. Bremond, and G. Francesca, “Action recognition
based on a mixture of RGB and depth based skeleton,” in Proc. 14th
IEEE Int. Conf. Adv. Video Signal Based Surveill. (AVSS), Aug. 2017,
pp. 1–6.
[22] B. Nojavanasghari, D. Gopinath, J. Koushik, T. Baltrušaitis, and
L.-P. Morency, “Deep multimodal fusion for persuasiveness predic-
tion,” in Proc. 18th ACM Int. Conf. Multimodal Interact., Oct. 2016,
pp. 284–288.
[23] Y. Wang, W. Huang, F. Sun, T. Xu, Y. Rong, and J. Huang, “Deep
multimodal fusion by channel exchanging,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst. (NeurIPS), vol. 33, 2020, pp. 1–11.
[24] H. Wang, B. Yu, J. Li, L. Zhang, and D. Chen, “Multi-stream
interaction networks for human action recognition,” IEEE Trans.
Circuits
Syst.
Video Technol.,
early
access,
Jul. 21, 2021,
doi:
10.1109/TCSVT.2021.3098839.
[25] Y. Tang, Z. Wang, J. Lu, J. Feng, and J. Zhou, “Multi-stream deep
neural networks for RGB-D egocentric action recognition,” IEEE Trans.
Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 29, no. 10, pp. 3001–3015, Oct. 2019.
[26] H. R. Vaezi Joze, A. Shaban, M. L. Iuzzolino, and K. Koishida,
“MMTM: Multimodal transfer module for CNN fusion,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2020,
pp. 13289–13299.
[27] W. Zhu, X. Wang, and H. Li, “Multi-modal deep analysis for mul-
timedia,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 30, no. 10,
pp. 3740–3764, Oct. 2020.
[28] W. Gao, G. Liao, S. Ma, G. Li, Y. Liang, and W. Lin, “Uniﬁed
information fusion network for multi-modal RGB-D and RGB-T salient
object detection,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol., early access,
May 25, 2021, doi: 10.1109/TCSVT.2021.3082939.
[29] X. Zhang, T. Wang, W. Luo, and P. Huang, “Multi-level fusion
and attention-guided CNN for image dehazing,” IEEE Trans. Circuits
Syst. Video Technol., vol. 31, no. 11, pp. 4162–4173, Nov. 2021, doi:
10.1109/TCSVT.2020.3046625.
[30] W. Zhou, Q. Guo, J. Lei, L. Yu, and J.-N. Hwang, “ECFFNet: Effec-
tive and consistent feature fusion network for RGB-T salient object
detection,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol., early access,
May 3, 2021, doi: 10.1109/TCSVT.2021.3077058.
[31] Q. Zhang, T. Xiao, N. Huang, D. Zhang, and J. Han, “Revisiting feature
fusion for RGB-T salient object detection,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst.
Video Technol., vol. 31, no. 5, pp. 1804–1818, May 2021.
[32] D. Francis, P. A. Nguyen, B. Huet, and C.-W. Ngo, “Fusion of mul-
timodal embeddings for ad-hoc video search,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int.
Conf. Comput. Vis. Workshop (ICCVW), Oct. 2019, pp. 1868–1872.
[33] C. Hori et al., “Attention-based multimodal fusion for video descrip-
tion,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV), Oct. 2017,
pp. 4193–4202.
[34] Z. Liu, Y. Shen, V. B. Lakshminarasimhan, P. P. Liang, A. Zadeh, and
L.-P. Morency, “Efﬁcient low-rank multimodal fusion with modality-
speciﬁc factors,” 2018, arXiv:1806.00064.
[35] J. Hu, L. Shen, and G. Sun, “Squeeze-and-excitation networks,” in
Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2018,
pp. 7132–7141.
[36] D. He, F. Li, Q. Zhao, X. Long, Y. Fu, and S. Wen, “Exploiting
spatial-temporal modelling and multi-modal fusion for human action
recognition,” 2018, arXiv:1806.10319.
[37] H. Kuang et al., “Multi-modal multi-layer fusion network with average
binary center loss for face anti-spooﬁng,” in Proc. 27th ACM Int. Conf.
Multimedia, Oct. 2019, pp. 48–56.
[38] F. Fooladgar and S. Kasaei, “Multi-modal attention-based fusion
model for semantic
segmentation
of RGB-depth
images,” 2019,
arXiv:1912.11691.
[39] D. Liu, K. Zhang, and Z. Chen, “Attentive cross-modal fusion network
for RGB-D saliency detection,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia, vol. 23,
pp. 967–981, 2021.
[40] K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman, “Two-stream convolutional networks
for action recognition in videos,” 2014, arXiv:1406.2199.
[41] L. Wang et al., “Temporal segment networks: Towards good pr
... (已截断, 原长度 9129 字符)

--- 第 12 页 ---
5292
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 32, NO. 8, AUGUST 2022
[47] Z. Shao, Y. Li, and H. Zhang, “Learning representations from skeletal
self-similarities for cross-view action recognition,” IEEE Trans. Circuits
Syst. Video Technol., vol. 31, no. 1, pp. 160–174, Jan. 2021.
[48] K. Liu, L. Gao, N. M. Khan, L. Qi, and L. Guan, “A multi-stream
graph convolutional networks-hidden conditional random ﬁeld model
for skeleton-based action recognition,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia, vol. 23,
pp. 64–76, 2021.
[49] M. Zhang, X. Liu, W. Liu, A. Zhou, H. Ma, and T. Mei, “Multi-
granularity reasoning for social relation recognition from images,”
in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Multimedia Expo. (ICME), Jul. 2019,
pp. 1618–1623.
[50] J. Liu, X. Fan, J. Jiang, R. Liu, and Z. Luo, “Learning a deep multi-
scale feature ensemble and an edge-attention guidance for image fusion,”
IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 105–119,
Jan. 2022, doi: 10.1109/TCSVT.2021.3056725.
[51] J. Chen, L. Yang, Y. Xu, J. Huo, Y. Shi, and Y. Gao, “A novel deep
multi-modal feature fusion method for celebrity video identiﬁcation,” in
Proc. 27th ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, Oct. 2019, pp. 2535–2538.
[52] C. Chen, R. Jafari, and N. Kehtarnavaz, “Fusion of depth, skeleton, and
inertial data for human action recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Acoust., Speech Signal Process. (ICASSP), Mar. 2016, pp. 2712–2716.
[53] A. Raza, H. Huo, and T. Fang, “PFAF-Net: Pyramid feature network
for multimodal fusion,” IEEE Sensors Lett., vol. 4, no. 12, pp. 1–4,
Dec. 2020.
[54] L. Su, C. Hu, G. Li, and D. Cao, “MSAF: Multimodal split attention
fusion,” 2020, arXiv:2012.07175.
[55] S. Xie, R. Girshick, P. Dollar, Z. Tu, and K. He, “Aggregated residual
transformations for deep neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jul. 2017, pp. 1492–1500.
[56] J. Jang, D. Kim, C. Park, M. Jang, J. Lee, and J. Kim, “ETRI-Activity3D:
A large-scale RGB-D dataset for robots to recognize daily activities of
the elderly,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS),
Oct. 2020, pp. 10990–10997.
[57] M. Liu and J. Yuan, “Recognizing human actions as the evolution of
pose estimation maps,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit., Jun. 2018, pp. 1159–1168.
[58] J.-F. Hu, W.-S. Zheng, J. Pan, J. Lai, and J. Zhang, “Deep bilinear
learning for RGB-D action recognition,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput.
Vis. (ECCV), Sep. 2018, pp. 335–351.
[59] P. Wang, W. Li, J. Wan, P. Ogunbona, and X. Liu, “Cooperative training
of deep aggregation networks for RGB-D action recognition,” in Proc.
AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell. (AAAI), 2018, pp. 1–8.
[60] S. Li, W. Li, C. Cook, C. Zhu, and Y. Gao, “Independently recurrent
neural network (IndRNN): Building a longer and deeper RNN,” in
Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., Jun. 2018,
pp. 5457–5466.
[61] H. Wang and L. Wang, “Beyond joints: Learning representations from
primitive geometries for skeleton-based action recognition and detec-
tion,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 27, no. 9, pp. 4382–4394,
Sep. 2018.
[62] C. Li, Q. Zhong, D. Xie, and S. Pu, “Skeleton-based action recognition
with convolutional neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Multime-
dia Expo. Workshops (ICMEW), Jul. 2017, pp. 597–600.
[63] Y.-H. Wen, L. Gao, H. Fu, F.-L. Zhang, and S. Xia, “Graph cnns with
motif and variable temporal block for skeleton-based action recognition,”
in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell. (AAAI), 2019, pp. 8989–8996.
[64] Y. Xu, J. Cheng, L. Wang, H. Xia, F. Liu, and D. Tao, “Ensemble
one-dimensional convolution neural networks for skeleton-based action
recognition,” IEEE Signal Process. Lett., vol. 25, no. 7, pp. 1044–1048,
Jul. 2018.
[65] C. Li, C. Xie, B. Zhang, J. Han, X. Zhen, and J. Chen, “Mem-
ory attention networks for skeleton-based action recognition,” IEEE
Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., early access, Mar. 15, 2021, doi:
10.1109/TNNLS.2021.3061115.
[66] C. Li, Q. Zhong, D. Xie, and S. Pu, “Co-occurrence feature learning
from skeleton data for action recognition and detection with hierarchical
aggregation,” 2018, arXiv:1804.06055.
[67] B. Li, X. Li, Z. Zhang, and F. Wu, “Spatio-temporal graph routing for
skeleton-based action recognition,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell.
(AAAI), 2019, pp. 8561–8568.
[68] L. Shi, Y. Zhang, J. Cheng, and H. Lu, “Two-stream adaptive graph
convolutional networks for skeleton-based action recognition,” in Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2019,
pp. 12026–12035.
[69] L. Shi, Y. Zhang, J. Cheng, and H. Lu, “Skeleton-based action recog-
nition with directed graph neural networks,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2019, pp. 7912–7921.
[70] Z. Liu, H. Zhang, Z. Chen, Z. Wang, and W. Ouyang, “Disentangling
and unifying graph convolutions for skeleton-based action recognition,”
in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
Jun. 2020, pp. 143–152.
[71] A. Shahroudy, J. Liu, T.-T. Ng, and G. Wang, “NTU RGB+D: A large
scale dataset for 3D human activity analysis,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 1010–1019.
Xiangbo Shu received the Ph.D. degree from the
Nanjing University of Science and Technology,
China, in 2016. From 2014 to 2015, he worked as a
visiting scholar at the National University of Singa-
pore, Singapore. He is currently a Professor with the
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nan-
jing University of Science and Technology. He has
authored over 60 journals and conference papers in
his research areas, including IEEE TRANSACTIONS
ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLI-
GENCE, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL NET-
WORKS AND LEARNING SYSTEMS, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE
PROCESSING, CVPR, ICCV, ECCV, and ACM MM. His current research
interests include computer vision and multimedia. He has received the Best
Student Paper Award from MMM 2016, the Best Paper Runner-Up from ACM
MM 2015, the Excellent Doctoral Dissertation of CAAI, and the Excellent
Doctoral Dissertation of Jiangsu Province.
Jiawen Yang is currently pursuing the master’s
degree with the School of Computer Science and
Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and
Technology, China. His current research interests are
computer vision and deep learning.
Rui Yan received the B.E. degree from Nanjing
Forestry University in 2017. He is currently pursuing
the Ph.D. degree with the School of Computer
Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Sci-
ence and Technology, China. From 2018 to 2019,
he worked as a research intern at the Huawei Noah’s
Ark Laboratory. He is currently a visiting scholar
with the Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, National University of Singapore. His
research interests include multimedia analysis and
computer vision.
Yan Song received the Ph.D. degree in computer
application technology from the Institute of Com-
puting Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
China, in 2011. She was a visiting scholar at the
University of Maryland from 2018 to 2019. She is
currently an Associate Professor with the School of
Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing Univer-
sity of Science and Technology, China. Her current
research interest is computer vision especially for
video content analysis and understanding.
Authorized licensed use limited to: NANJING UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on January 31,2023 at 14:11:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.
